
> ***
> #ISSUE/TODO
> 
> #### Find Important fact
> 
>  Find papers supporting that in E. coli the turnover rate for proteins is small compared with the growth rate.
> 
> #Target/JohnDoe #Referee/JohnDoe
> `2025:02:12-08:01:37`

> ***
> #ISSUE/TODO
> 
> #### Create a fact sheet
> 
>  - I need a system to compile 'simple' ideas/concepts/theories of interest that the community.
>  - For instance, MOMA is about assuming that the regulation will try just to circle around a mutation and keep as mush as possible similar to the wild type. 
>  - while Im reading, I need to be able to tag one of such ideas for later archiving. 
> 
> #Target/JohnDoe #Referee/JohnDoe
> `2025:02:12-08:04:47`

> ***
> #ISSUE/TODO
> 
> #### ISSUE
> 
>  - If I find a piece of data with is relevant for a larger idea I found an ISSUE
>  - Yes, again, we should learn from software dev workflow
>  - We have projects 
> 	 - Here might be just questions, collections, actual research project
> 	 - A project will be just a boundle of data that we need to find across the voult.
> 	 - The way to systematically gather all relevant data is by tagging them first while we surface the literature. 
> 	 - Often, we will discover issues relevant to project X while working in project Y.
> 	 - That is why developing an indirect and light system of taging stuff is useful.
> 	 - Later if we focus again in project X, we can retrieve the net of tags and processed all previously found information. 
>
> #### SOLUTION
> - Maybe a system where each project has a set of predefined tags or keywords, and when they encounter data, they apply the relevant tags.
> 	- Maybe a central index or dashboard where each project has a list of associated tags.
> 	- Then, the user can click on a project and see all notes tagged with its relevant tags.
> 	- You need to create a Project <-> Tags relationships. 
> 		- When you found relevant data for a project, you need to tag it with the relevant tags.
> 			- The tags can be new
> 		- The missing part today is that you need to go to the relevant projects main note and register the tags as project related tags. 
> 		- This is very useful, because you can more effectible reuse already created tags. 
> 
> 
> #Target/JohnDoe #Referee/JohnDoe
> `2025:02:12-08:16:19`
